So I think the, I asked Ted very last minute to
change the description of the talk and I didn't make it
.
I don't blame him.
He's a trans-dimensional being, so.
The talk is actually about how, what the future of startups
looks like in the world of open data.
Not quite so much about, initially it was about like,
you know, the experience I had working on a product with
lexicons that I didn't, you know, I
didn't make a single original lexicon.
And I was happy about that.
That was a great thing.
But, you know, then it kind of expanded more,
especially when I started talking to the community a lot more.
And then there's like sort of a bigger issue here about
, you know, the computer kill mentality that's there in
conventional tech startups in the tech world.
And what a huge opportunity we have to kind of change that
and disrupt that in the ad proto world or the world of
open data.
So I want to talk about that a little bit.
So, yeah, let's get started.
Let's dive into like a little bit of the old world
.
Like, what the world looked like.
Good old Microsoft, you know.
So Microsoft kind of kicked things off.
I mean, there's obviously like much, many more stories
of how there's like this crazy competition outside of the tech
world.
But in the tech world, I think one of the biggest
stories that got us kicked off back in the 90s,
this was 96, was Microsoft with their kind of like cut
throat, we must dominate mentality.
They kind of dominated the market for operating systems in the first
place.
But on top of that, you know, when this new
thing called the Internet came out and they were like, we
've got to get in on that.
So Netscape at the time was dominating the space with
the Internet browser Netscape Navigator.
I think Mike McHugh is somewhere in this sphere.
So I'm glad he's not here because I hope I
get all the details right.
But, yeah, Microsoft didn't quite like that.
And they were like, you know, we've got to
get ourselves in there fast.
So what they did was they noticed that everyone was using open
standards.
And that's a way for them to kind of put themselves
in there.
Everyone's kind of like agreeing that, you know, we
've got to use these standards to kind of like build on
the Internet.
So then they say, yeah, we're going to come
in, we're going to embrace your standards.
We're going to, you know, make sure that we
want to give the users the best, you know, even
when some of that is originated elsewhere, like from people contributing
to the ecosystem.
And then, you know, the next thing they do is
they extend it, being like, oh, we have to
, we're not going to hold back our users for waiting
for these like slow moving organizations and standards bodies.
You know, we're going to have to move fast and
do some of the things our own way.
And the well-being of those few people who aren't
our users is understandable, but also not a high priority,
you know.
And then eventually that goes to Extinguish, where they
did this with ActiveX and Internet Explorer extensions to kind of
like dominate the market share and kind of make sure that they
are the only ones who kind of stay in there.
So the rationale for that is like, why should we expend
effort towards keeping competitors viable?
Why shouldn't we actively help potential customers join us?
You know, why do we have to care anymore?
So suddenly the same, you know, standards that they were
embracing, they have kind of weaponized that to kind of
keep all the competitors out.
And, you know, of course, they can also just
tell all the PC manufacturers they're working with, if you
work with Netscape, we're going to stop supplying
you.
So, you know, that's another way to just like
kill your competitors.
You know, so it's kind of crazy how Nets
cape was literally 90% in 1995.
And in the span of like seven years, like, you
know, it flipped completely to 5%, you know.
And Internet Explorer took over because of these sort of practices.
And, you know, AOL acquires Netscape
by the end of this, so they kind of get a
nice, cushy exit.
Okay, a bunch of people have had a chance to kind
of dunk on the Zuck.
It's my turn, okay.
So this is the thing.
He spent years shouting domination at the end of Facebook.
Like, that's so weird.
Like, I mean, imagine doing that at the end of
a meeting, being like, domination.
What?
What a strange guy.
And, you know, this is another thing that the guy
, the Zuck, is capable of, you know.
Like, he was working with Harvard to do the Facebook,
but, you know, he's just giving out the data
to other people.
That's the kind of person that kind of comes up with
this competition attitude, you know.
That's like, I mean, I'm dunking on
Zuck for sure, but like there's a sort of
domination attitude, which is an abstraction that I'm trying to
point towards here.
And to ground it more in sort of like the same story
as Microsoft from earlier.
So we're all familiar with Snap, and we kind of
lived through this.
I was actively using Snap as a teenager at that point.
And, you know, what was going on behind the scenes
at that point was in 2012, Facebook acquired Instagram for $
1 billion.
And they, I think within a year, they wanted to
acquire Snapchat because Snapchat was like this hot new thing.
All the kids were using it.
They wanted to, you know, grab those little kids in
a, you know, probably weird way.
But Snapchat declined the offer.
And I think there was a subsequent offer from Google as well
, which they also declined.
And they continued to grow over those years.
Like for a solid three or four years after that, Snapchat
went up to 150 million users.
But then, don't be too proud to copy.
That was actually from a memo that was in Facebook.
You know, they said, we should just rip those off
.
We have Instagram.
Let's just put stories in there.
You know, they launched stories.
In one year, when they launched Instagram, when Snapchat had
150 million users, within one year, Instagram had overtaken
that, you know.
And there was, like, I mean, for the previous
story, there was at least an anti-compete for
that scenario.
And antitrust, rather.
And Microsoft did actually face some repercussions.
Not that it really stopped them in the grand scheme.
But here, nothing happened.
You know, Snapchat exists as a husk of itself,
doing whatever people there do now.
And, you know, this attitude of, like, copying
things has pervaded, you know, Facebook.
But not just Facebook, you know.
Like, within Facebook alone, you have stories that become Snapchat
.
You have reels from TikTok and threads.
Like, they built threads in, I think, in five
months, which is, you know, pretty insane.
And there's a point there.
That these guys, at some point, the biggest guys,
they become brokers of scale.
The large companies become brokers of scale.
And they're able to stay dominant because they have the means
and ability to deploy things at scale really fast.
And they have the users.
They have the distribution.
They have the network effects.
And if you're some kind of, like, upstart
with a genuinely innovative product and idea, you become big enough
to get to the point where they'll notice you.
And then they're kind of, you know, they're
going to decide your fate at that point.
And I want to look at this now from the founder perspective
, you know.
If you're building a company, like, you want to
create something of value.
And then you want to grow.
And then, like, kind of the meta now, if
you're a startup, you know, or, like,
a founder, an entrepreneur, you want to, like,
sell to the broker of scale.
Like, this is actually, this isn't a failure.
This is, like, the expected outcome.
Like, founders now in, like, all these startup universities
, they're taught to do this stuff, you know.
Like, this is kind of, like, we've accepted
that this is how the life cycle of a product, of
a new innovative thing should be.
And it's just, like, you know, it's
first you build something that people love, you know.
There's a whole user side of this.
Users start relying on your product.
They start, you know, integrating it into their lives.
They start trusting it with their data.
They start using it to find their community and build their community
.
There were some conversations I had with community members here and,
of course, about meetup.
com.
Maybe you guys have had some bad experiences yourself, you know
, where you're paying a bunch of money.
And, you know, what's really happening there?
You know, there's, like, I think I was
talking to someone who said that meetup sent them a notice
being, like, oh, you're our, like,
I think you've brought, like, 10,000 people
or reached 10,000 people to the network.
And also, by the way, can you pay us for
the next year?
It's like, you should be paying them, man.
But anyway, that's almost a separate point.
But the point is here is that you kind of grow something
until you're visible.
And then when you sell, as an entrepreneur, if you
sell, the product is a sacrifice.
Like, the users who have now spent all this time building
a relationship with what you've built, now it's,
they're kind of, you know, they become the sacrifice
.
Like, all of that is sacrificed.
Yeah, and the other note here is, like, scale
doesn't matter.
Like, Instagram, with its 30 million users, was a
1 billion purchase, 400 million users for WhatsApp.
Oculus, that was more of, like, a hardware remote
.
And be real, this is kind of a newer example.
I just found this out while researching this talk.
It had 40 million users.
And, you know, like, even now, it's
like, it doesn't matter if you hit the scale.
If you hit a scale that's kind of big enough,
big tech just comes in and swoops in.
Because they just have to continue to dominate.
It's just a mandate of domination.
And, yeah, to go back to the earlier point,
it's just, you know, I'm going to use
some Cory Doctorow stuff here.
The n-shittification starts happening, you know.
This is, like, the eventual decline and death of products
.
You know, people have, like, opinions about Doctorow
and the word n-shittification, but it is
a true concept.
It's something that happens to us, you know.
I don't know if you guys have watched the movie Pentagon
Wars.
It's fantastic.
It's about, basically, the Pentagon, they have this
Bradley fighting vehicle, which is, like, this, a
tank.
But, you know, people, people aren't exactly sure
what it is.
Like, people get promoted to be in charge of it.
They slap on a new feature, then they get promoted to
work on something else.
And then this goes on for, like, a while.
And Kelsey Grammer, he's, you know, the
guy in charge.
But then, at some point, an airline guy comes in
to vet the product, and he finds out that it doesn
't work, it doesn't do anything.
And people aren't even sure what it's supposed to do
, because it's supposed to be, like, submarine.
It's supposed to be a land.
It's supposed to be troop transport.
It has a gun.
And so the point here and the analogy here is that,
you know, eventually the big tech, like, when they
have their own products, like Google or Spotify, they start
slapping on these features.
People get promoted, you know, to a higher position,
and then they stop caring about it.
They move on to other things.
And then, ultimately, you just have, like, this
mess of, like, 50 different things going on.
The user is, like, I actually just wanted these three
things that I always had before, you know.
And if you're a big company, this is what happens
.
If you're a startup, you sell your company, and
then it becomes part of this machine where the same thing happens
.
You know, the user didn't choose the acquisition.
The user doesn't get anything out of this.
In fact, they just get, you know, they get
squeezed more for putting their trust, placing their trust in this
sort of ecosystem.
So that's, like, and their information is weaponized
against them now.
And, ultimately, you know, at some point, they
'll just throw it out, you know, Google Reader
.
There's, like, Killed by Google has, I
think, like, something like 200 products that Google has killed
, maybe even more, actually, I forget.
But, yeah, you know, at some point, everything
you've kind of, like, worked towards, built your
sort of, like, interaction with the Internet around, your
community around, is now just gone, you know.
Yeah, and founders aren't the bad guys.
Like, why should, like, we're not, like
, we're not bad for innovating here, right?
The late-stage capitalism machine has forced us to serve the
overlords, even if we break out of the system and
forge our own paths.
And users kind of end up in the same spot, even
if they, you know, trust something that's new,
even if they kind of, like, go with the overl
ords.
And the system kind of frames this as, like, exits
are success, and gentrification is growth, you know
, with all these metrics that come, like the dashboards
that analysts are looking at and trying to squeeze users more.
And lock-in is network effects, you know.
Okay, that was enough of the doom and gloom.
Let's start talking about the good stuff.
Open data.
So I want to just talk about lexicons, just
in case anyone's not familiar with them.
In app protocol, they are the unit of information.
So essentially, everything you do in the app protocol, if
you like something, it's a record, it's a
lexicon that gets emitted and stored on a personal data
server.
And that's sort of, like, the information that's
traveling around, that's a lexicon.
Apps don't need to declare their own types.
They can grab existing ones.
It's cool that I've seen a lot of developers kind
of come into the ecosystem being like, what, the same
types are in different apps?
That's awesome, you know.
It's a very cool selling point for app proto.
And developers can publish their own types and contribute to what's
already, like, a very rich ecosystem.
Like, there's, well, Paul said there's,
like, a thousand apps on app proto now, which is
pretty awesome.
I just want to show a few lexicons, just
so it's clear what we're doing.
I have lexicon garden here.
Yeah, so we have a cool website, lexicon
.
garden.
If you guys haven't seen it, please check it out
.
So, yeah, it's basically just a string that's
attached to a DNS.
So it's bsky.
app is the app for Blue Sky.
And you can kind of, like, specify it.
This is called a namespace ID.
And you can kind of add a bunch of metadata to it
that kind of defines what it is to like something, in
this case, you know.
So, like, what is the thing that's being liked
?
I'm not sure what the via is, but, yeah
, when it's created and what's actually being liked.
That's kind of, like, what matters to us here
.
Let's go back to full screen.
Yeah, and now lexicons kind of open up a
lot of things to us.
In the old world, data is proprietary.
We can't interoperate apps.
You have to clone features.
Like we saw, like, with stories, with reels
, with threads, like how, like, you know,
you have to build the whole thing by yourself in this sort
of, like, necessarily antagonistic way.
Now we have this sort of new perspective, new world,
where, like, I'm about to demonstrate something I built
later.
But, like, I like a few features and I think
I could compose these specific features from these different apps and then
kind of, like, do my own weird thing, you
know.
So it's all about the quality of the interface than it
is about, like, trying to capture users and drive growth
.
And from a user perspective, you can pick one app.
You can accept all its compromises before.
Like, you know, you're kind of stuck in this
, the late-stage capitalism machine that I was talking about
.
But now you can just pick whatever app you want for your
future.
We've already seen this in Blue Sky.
You have all these different front ends for Blue Sky, like
Deer.
social or, like, a fully different app view, like
Black Sky.
You have all these different opportunities.
And as we saw yesterday, you can just make your own
experience, you know.
Like, users have infinite choice.
You can see a couple I made already there.
But so this is kind of, like, a big,
big game changer.
And I want to kind of talk about, like, this
is the part of the talk where I'm, like,
I'm not sure where we're going.
But I have a lot of questions.
I can at least throw those out there.
So a few experiences I think I had.
I don't know if any of you guys were in Ad
Science a few days ago.
In this exact room, there was a beautiful moment, one
of my favorite moments of the conference so far, which was
Som.
He goes by the handle H-Y-L.
S-T.
Super cool person.
And he built an extension called Seams, which is for
annotating the atmosphere, or, like, annotating websites
on the atmosphere, or just on the internet.
But I think after Margin came out, he kind of
, like, lost his joy.
I think he felt a little bit, like, drained from
it.
He gave me permission to talk about this.
I'm just, you know, that's...
So, like, he kind of, like, shared his
experience, actually right here, exactly here, about how he
's kind of, like, hospicing his extension, which
is, you know, an interesting perspective.
So I think what he said that stuck with me was,
like, you've got to build with joy, you know
?
And he kind of, like, lost the joy that he
was building for.
So if we're building something, we definitely have to build
for joy.
And we want to build stuff for the community.
Like, you know, I think Blaine's talk yesterday
was a really big part of this.
Like, you can just, like, you know, we
're all cheese, you know?
You've got to just show up and make sure that the
microbiome is looking good and you're doing it for the
right reasons and for the right people.
And we have to break the old patterns, you know?
We have to, you know, make sure that we're
not contributing back to the old ecosystem.
We have this new opportunity.
We have a necessarily different way of approaching competition.
We can all build stuff that is similar.
Even Tori, the other day from Skylight, she
was saying in her talk about how, you know, there
's, like, all these other...
In the Fediverse, there's Divine, which is another
video platform.
And she's like, that's awesome.
That's great.
We're all kind of growing...
All ships rise together.
But at the same time, we've got to get paid
, you know?
This is a post from Rudy a few days ago.
Like, this is a part of the atmosphere that's,
like, very heavily unsolved, which is what are we
going to do about payments?
I consider talking a little bit more about this, but I
think it kind of, like, expands the scope too much
.
But, you know, we have...
We don't really have protocols that are on payment yet.
Sorry, payments on protocol yet.
We don't really know how value creation happens.
We don't really know how apps can make money.
We don't know what's a convincing sell to investors here
, you know?
So we have good intentions.
We have sort of, like, a post, you know
, cut-through competition world, potentially.
So what can we do with that in a way that actually
is, you know, value creation here?
You know, I mean, if you look back in economic
theory, and I'm flexing my economics minor here,
it's going to work a little too hard for a second
.
Oscar Morgenstein and John von Neumann made the book
The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, which is about...
which kind of brought game theory as a mathematical field into what
was the social science before of economics.
And that kind of started this movement of economics that eventually led
to the market's creation and sort of, like, the
, you know, zero-sum games was exactly what
they built and how, you know, if I get money
, it's at the expense of someone else.
Since that time, economic theory has moved to positive sum.
There's, like, all kinds of, like, goofy
things they're doing, and this is where my economics minor
stops.
But what I do know is that the theory has completely moved
on, but the world is stuck with the same zero-
sum stuff that we don't need to be stuck in
anymore.
So, and there's a few examples of this in the
wild already.
Like, we have Patreon.
That's something that's come in the last decade where,
like, donations are actually something that's people's regular source
of income, you know, on a monthly basis.
And you have all these other, like, sort of mutual
aid and all these things that are coming up that are all
on the Internet.
This is the sort of model we need to move towards,
and this is where it would be cool for us to use
this framing that I'm presenting to come up with a way
that we can monetize apps in the future, convince investors
to get in, and then get people to be able to
be paid to work on this stuff full-time, because
, you know, man's got to eat.
So for the last maybe five minutes or so, I'm
going to show the extension I made, which is rabbit hole
.
Yeah, it occupies your new tab, and essentially it
stores, you can kind of grab all the, you can
track your rabbit holes online.
That's kind of the idea here.
These are a bunch of the different rabbit holes I made.
The part where it relates to competition is because I don't
, I didn't make any original lexicons here.
These are all, these are trails, where, which were
made on SideTrail, an app made by Dan Abr
amal, who's coincidentally giving a talk in another
room right now.
Let me find a little trail.
There was a good one.
Oh, there you go.
Brendan's one for Leaflet.
So this extension allows you to actually, you know, just
walk a trail.
And check out stuff.
Like, there's information on each, you know, stop
that you're making on the trail that lets you kind of
, like, understand what you need to do.
And after that, hopefully you come out of it with some
sort of knowledge or skill.
I'll go through the whole thing.
So if you guys haven't used Leaflet, beautiful editor
, you know, it's, give it a try for
sure.
And it's fully feature complete.
I don't use Notion anymore, which is awesome.
Yeah.
And let's just get to the end.
And the other thing that you can organize your rabbit holes into
are burrows.
These are literally just assemble collections.
So that's, like, that's something, you know
, these are all lexicons that already exist.
And I don't see the need for us to, like
, you know, if you want to build new stuff,
you can build new stuff.
If you want to take features, you can take features.
All you got to do is have ideas and compose them.
So that's kind of it in terms of what I plan
to talk about.
So we can, if you guys got questions, we can
start talking about those.
Excellent.
Thank you.
I love that idea of, like, oh, he just
kind of drops.
He's like, these are all just assemble collections, you
know, just composing all these different parts.
And they're not even, like, protocol-based parts
.
They're, like, the next level up.
You know, that's the composable bit.
And then you can keep composing, keep composing.
Excellent.
Thank you very much.
All right.
Let's give a round of applause.
Thank you, guys.
Thank you.
All right.
Anybody have any questions or comments?
Let me get you the mic.
Let me get you the mic for the stream.
I was just saying, was that a Chrome extension?
Yeah, it's a Chromium only for now.
Very soon, I'll do Firefox as well.
There'll be an extension, sorry, there'll be an
announcement for that coming, like, probably today at some point
.
So, yeah, look out for that.
What's it called?
What was it called?
Rabbit Hole.
The Rabbit Hole extension.
Oh, right there.
On the Expo panel, they talked about how it allowed
them to ship quickly.
Like, there was this implicit competitive advantage thing.
Yeah, I was just thinking about that.
So, there still seems to be this drive to get something
out fast, be the first one, potential first mover.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Yeah, I mean, I think that's a good thing
.
You know, if you have an idea and you're burning
with fashion to, like, get it out there, that
's such a good feeling.
I've experienced that feeling a lot and I think there's
nothing wrong with that.
In fact, I'm more happy than ever that the same
joy I experienced as a programmer when I first built something and
I saw it worked, seeing that other people can have access
to this without knowing how to program is awesome.
I think that's just a really good thing.
So I think if you make something first, that's cool
.
It's like, even this, like, rabbit hole,
like, I think I saw Margin come out, I
'm like, wow, this looks like they're doing similar
stuff to me.
I'm like, I just like building this.
I've been building this for myself and you can see how
many I have.
I have like a whole bunch.
So that's kind of, yeah, that's my thing
on that.
But that's an interesting point and that's something that I
think is changing as well.
Like one, like over the last, say, 15 or
20 years of startups, we've often had to remind beginners
that come into the space that, you know, once they
have this passionate idea and then they make it and then they
see, oh, this person already made it.
Oh, it's like, no, they're doing more
than one of those things in the world.
That's okay and you can spin your own version.
But now, you know, especially with like Claude and
stuff, you're going to see a lot more like slightly
tweaked different versions as people, as, you know,
Jay said yesterday she was calling it liquid.
You know, UIs are liquid and we talk about m
alleable software and those types of concepts.
So I think first to market doesn't necessarily, might lose
meaning in the future, maybe?
I don't know.
Dawn, here you go.
Yeah, great talk, great conversation so far.
Wondering if you could build on what's just been
said into that thing, you, your slide where you talk
about like figuring out ways to get paid and do you have
ideas or like dreams or like what that could look like for
you in a non-zero-sum ecosystem?
Yeah, I definitely, I think, as a lot of
things in the protocol, Black Sky has been stewarding
or taking the lead on this with Black Sky Cash.
I'm eager to see how that pans out.
I do think, I haven't talked to Jay about this
yesterday, about like, what do they think about, you
know, payments on protocol and that's not something that,
you know, I understand there's a sequencing for things that
need to happen.
Like private data right now is probably more important.
What I think would be cool is at least we start with
mutual aid, we start with donations on protocol.
It's actually kind of a cruel irony for me, someone
who came from the crypto world.
I was working on a bunch of cool projects, a bunch
of people were working on cool projects, which the least cool
part was the fact that there's a cryptocurrency and people like
are expected to work with it.
Now it's like we come to this space where we got
all the cool stuff but we don't actually have any payments
on protocol.
It's just a funny irony that, yeah.
Any other questions from the crowd?
Okay, great.
Well, thank you very much for the presentation.
Thank you everybody for this afternoon.
Cheers.